Five years ago I met two gentlemen.
I am the one on the right.
(Laughter)
We have different backgrounds,
we never happened to meet elsewhere,
we never ran into each other before.
We all have an academic career,
an engineering degree, a business degree,
and we work on four continents.
We are a physicist,
a chemist, and an economist.
The three of us were
at that time at an age
where folks rather contemplate retirement
than a bold launch
into innovative ventures.
Nevertheless, 11 months later,
we built something new together,
something truly new:
a device to tell the truth in public.
To tell the truth?
What exactly were we talking about?
Most of the statements we make everyday
can't be classified as true or false.
Sentences such as: "Hi, how are you?"
"Let's have a coffee,"
fall under greetings, invitations,
orders, opinions, suggestions,
and they are neither true nor false.
On the other hand,
those like "It's raining,"
"That's 365 pesos cash,"
"This house is mine,"
are statements that can be verified.
I am exclusively talking about
the sentences referring to true facts.
Those that anybody with goodwill,
common sense,
and appealing to elementary logic
might decide, faced with facts,
if they are true or misleading.
I refer to something similar
to what we use in our contracts,
when we come to an agreement,
when we negotiate our wages,
upon purchasing
a washing machine, for example.
"That will be 15,000 pesos
in 12 equal installments from the date
and to be delivered at your home
tomorrow between 14.00 and 17.00 hours."
Nothing's vague, tricky, or ambiguous.
I doubt anyone can just walk away
with the washing machine
or get off Scot-free
by arguing neoliberalism is harmful
or objectivity does not exist.
So let's agree then
the facts really tell in these cases
and the truth about them really matters.
We take those sentences
zealously, diligently, responsibly,
because the data they contained
has an impact on our lives.
Now, that's happening
in the private sphere.
What about the public discourse?
That is to say the discourse poured
in the public space by the politicians,
the media, the press, businessmen,
the trade unions, social referents.
Lately, the public discourse,
- though it isn't something
that hasn't happened
in Argentina or in the world before -
has started to move away from the facts.
The facts and the truth
fade into the background,
with narrative, gossip, and opinion
taking the central stage,
as well as the biased data,
innuendos, even sheer manipulation.
The political discourse,
- as well as the media's
and every other social actor's -
grew more and more dependent
on the narrative.
And there is a reason for this.
Narrative is powerful
if only because it bypasses
a rational analysis of objective facts
to hit home on emotions.
And driven by emotions
we subscribe to proposals,
political parties' and references' ideas.
The problem is when the narrative
starts having a life of its own.
They are powerful
because we think so of them.
Humans think in narratives
and not about isolated incidents.
Take Coca-Cola for example and its use
of the power of storytelling
that sells 1.7 billion drinks a day,
as well as other nonprofit,
nongovernmental organizations
that manage to eradicate
childhood diarrhea
in areas where it is endemic,
or bring at the forefront
of social agendas
causes such as the need
for the environmental protection,
gender equality, and human rights,
However, when the narrative spreads
across the entire public discourse,
the hard facts and the truth
turn into unwelcome guests,
into obstacles, or mere limits.
And they decide to ignore them,
or that they must be left aside,
banished from the public discourse
or simply hidden from sight.
Thus, debate on the issue
tends to slowly disappear
because it is difficult to discuss when
the facts or the truth aren't available.
This is how we came to witness a situation
where the media, the politicians,
the social referents enter into a state
the kind where they completely reject
to meet their commitments,
or recognize the facts and the truth,
and thus cheat, commit crimes,
and enter in a kind of default state
when it comes to their role
and mission towards citizens.
And we, as citizens immersed
in this narrative paradigm,
also slacken in our efforts
to claim reporting
based on factual evidence,
and to call for a narrative
based on truth.
Thus, our involvement
with the public discourse
increasingly declines.
This means for many of us,
and without even realizing it
that we are undermining
the essence of democracy itself.
Democracy is citizen-centered,
it's powered
through citizen participation.
It depends on us as social actors,
as agents of democracy.
And to be an agent of democracy
we rely on information
instant, live information,
ready for action.
Without timely and accurate information
it is impossible to act as agents,
and we depend on others
for that kind of information;
on the media, on those in whom
we've placed our faith and trust.
And this is precisely
what we have decided to do,
reinsert that lost faith and trust
into the democratic discourse.
To do that, I together with my partners
who far from retiring
are actively involved,
devised a means that can ensure
the quality of the public discourse,
to ensure the quality of public discourse,
and telling the truth publicly.
We founded Chequeado.com,
a site dedicated to the restoration
of the naked truth and hard facts
back into the public discourse.
Chequeado verifies all statements
made in the public discourse
by all social actors.
It assembles quotes from politicians,
the media and trade unionists,
and analyzes the facts.
It runs them against other
independent sources and contrasts them
with what other specialists
and independent sources have stated.
It scans for all information
and evidence available
and establishes whether
such information is correct,
true or misleading.
For that, we have to also earn
people's trust
to be read and be believed.
Chequeado has its own style manual
and checking methods
and terminally prohibits
any political biases,
prejudice
and partisanship,
and advocates for the existence
of mechanisms that ensure all this.
Chequeado has a large number
of very diverse funding sources
precisely to avoid
relying on each of them,
and thus it depends a little bit
on each of those who make a donation,
it depends a little bit on everybody.
Our statutes prohibit any dependency
and interference coming from its founders.
Chequeado has had a huge impact
not only on the citizens
but also on the political actors.
Ministers visit our website,
legislators share data with us,
the press is mentioning us,
politicians need to retract due to us,
and there are even some of them
who choose to fight with us,
but all, many of them,
think twice before speaking.
Our community is causing
the facts and the truth
to be valued again.
I am part of the Chequeado community
I read it, I follow it
on Twitter and Facebook,
I listen to it on the radio,
I watch it on television,
and the live feeds on key events,
such as the presidential speeches,
that are all gathered
into the general pool
of the data on our platform.
Chequeado has proven
that a social partnership is possible.
and we dedicate our activity to that:
to prove that the agency
is necessary and possible,
and ensures the quality
of the public discourse.
Sometimes, the social inertia
seems endless,
as infinite as the power
of the political world,
as unbeatable as the power
of corporations,
as unshakable as the media power
may also seem.
But the power resides in the citizen.
We delegate, but we do not abdicate.
Civic causes applied
to just and specific causes
have proven successful over and over.
Restoring the hard facts and the truth
in the public discourse is key,
and a network of citizens
determined to restore the truth
as the essential element in the fabric
of the public discourse can do it.
We will achieve it.
We are achieving it.
Thank you.
(Applause)